Camara OIDC profile (#121)
camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement: documentation/CAMARA-Security-Interoperability.md

# CAMARA Security and Interoperability Profile

## Table of Contents
<!-- TOC -->
* Introduction
* Audience
* Conventions
* General Considerations
    * Transport Security
* OIDC Authorization Code Flow
    * Cross-Site Request Forgery Protection
* Client-Initiated Backchannel Authentication Flow
    * Authentication Request
* Client Credentials Flow
    * Access Token Request
* The Scope Parameter
* Client Authentication
* References
<!-- TOC -->

> ## Introduction

Author: @sfnuser Please propose some intro text. Is there similar text in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/113 you are happy with regarding future enhancements and backwards compatibility?

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: @AxelNennker Thanks for looking into it. I asked the same in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/113 but was not answered - lost in commit overwrites I guess.

Honestly, I do not have a clarity on the scope and hence I posted the question in case I am missing something. This project has a release cycle and will OIDC profile be part of the release? As OIDC profile governs all CAMARA sub-projects, how will the API specifications refer to the OIDC profile? For e.g. Will the API specification yaml have a line that `this API confirms to ICM project release v0.3.0`? This will be helpful to track AZ feature sets that are supported in an API. Maybe we could start with this approach and if and when a need arise we can think of OIDC profile spec alone version controlled separately within the project. If there is consensus, we could add this text in the introduction section. Sub-project members will participate actively as the scope is now clear. What do you think?

I think none of the CAMARA API versions are backwards compatible yet. If we have an agreement on the above point, it would be clear on how APIs approach OIDC profile when deciding API versioning.

> ## Introduction

Author: I assume that is for the TSC to decide. Many requirements important to Camara implementers and clients are in commonalities, how is this done with commonalities?
@sfnuser Please create a new separate issue about release cycles etc and resolve this conversation

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: @hdamker @AxelNennker OK. Fine with me 👍🏼

* Client Authentication. Specifications for client authentication within CAMARA.

By encapsulating these elements within this document, it aims to provide a comprehensive guide for developers and operators, ensuring consistent implementation and adherence to standardized security measures across the CAMARA ecosystem. The defined OIDC profile not only facilitates the integration process, but also serves as a basic framework for developers wishing to leverage the CAMARA APIs while maintaining security and interoperability.

## Audience

The target audience for this document is the service/technical departments of operators exposing network functions via standard CAMARA APIs. And applications or client systems that consume CAMARA standard APIs to make use of the operator's network capabilities.

## Conventions

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

## General Considerations

### Transport Security
All network connections MUST use TLS 1.2 or better.

## OIDC Authorization Code Flow

> The OIDC Authorization Code Flow is defined in [OpenID Connect](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html)

Author: I searched the numberverification repo for prompt and found this comment.

```text
    **Additional details:**

    - **(1):** Authentication must be automatic without any user interactions. Authentication methods such as SMS OTP or user/password are incompatible, as the goal is to validate the mobile phone number that is accessing the App. So it is required to be authentication via mobile network and without the user being involved. the use of parameter prompt=none, as described in **[OIDC Connect](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthRequest)**, ensures no user interaction.

    - **(2):** The way in which the phone_number is retrieved depends on the implementation. For example, access token may be a self contained encrypted JWT, so API can decrypt and identify phone_number. Some other implementations might request the phone_number associated to the token from Authserver.
```

Why is the numberverification subproject using authorization code flow when "authentication must be automatic"?
Numberverification could use authorization code flow to collect user consent and then use the access token to call the numberverification API. If the access token is expired, and the client (mobile app or web app) has a refresh token, then the refresh token can be used to request a new access token. Whether the user is bothered again with login or consent collection is up to the AZ then. 
In authorization code flow the code request must be authenticated (user login). There can't be a prompt=none without client authentication. The AZ can and probably should reject a prompt=none request, if there is no indication that the request is "legitimate".

I have the impression that numberverification tries to misuse the OIDC prompt=none parameter. Which of course leads to all kind of trouble because the AZ might be abused by 3rd parties who use prompt=none to trick the AZ into leaking user PII (is the telephone number served by that telco?).

If the client is using the numberverification API with prompt=none then there MUST be some prove that the client is allowed to make that request.

My opinion: If the API subproject needs some specific AZ behavior then that behavior should be defined here and not in a subproject document.

We could add a section `prompt=none`here, that would fit the profile. But maybe numberverification is better served with sticking to authorization code flow and access tokens and refresh tokens, or if the API has a no-consent-needed variant then use OAuth2 client credentials flow.

@DT-DawidWroblewski What's your opinion?

How to apply the concept of purpose with scope can be found in [Section Purposes of CAMARA APIs access and user consent management](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/main/documentation/CAMARA-API-access-and-user-consent.md).

## ID Token sub claim

The subject identifier must be globally unique identifier and a case-sensitive ASCII string with a maximum length of 255. The sub value MUST not contain the MSISDN. Within Camara this is populated by a Pseudonymous Customer Reference (PCR) which is a system-facing unique identifier that links a User’s MSISDN/IP-Address to a ASP. It is generated by the OP.

## Client Authentication

This CAMARA document allows **one** client authentication method, private_key_jwt, as defined in OIDC
[OIDC Client Authentication](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#ClientAuthentication)
[JSON Web Token (JWT) Profile for OAuth 2.0 Client Authentication and Authorization Grants](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7523.html#section-2.2)

## Sender-constraint Access Token

> This CAMARA document RECOMMENDS sender-constraint access tokens.

Reviewer 2: This has never been discussed.

Author: That might be true, but this document is about Camara security and sender-constraint access tokens add  considerably to Camara security. [FAPI 2.0](https://openid.bitbucket.io/fapi/fapi-2_0-security-profile.html) requires sender-constraint access tokens. TMOUS expressed interest in sender-constraint access tokens. I guess because US telcos are nearly there to implement DPoP.

So, I suggested that ICM recommends sender-constraint access tokens and require DPoP support for AZ.

Starting the discussion now

Author: @jpengar You are always arguing over processes but not over content. 
I agree that putting sender-constraint assertions into the document from https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/113 would make that document harder to comprehend. It is already very long and hard to review because the differences  to the standards are not clearly marked. 

If we continue with the #113 approach, we would probaly need to repeat DPop and also add text about sender-constraint assertions.

With this short and concise document adding sender-constraint assertions is no big deal which improves Camara security incredibly. 

Of course, only if WG members agree and support sender-constraint assertions implemented using DPop.

Reviewer 3: >@jpengar You are always arguing over processes but not over content.

@AxelNennker Ido really  hope this is the last time I have to ask you to keep the discussion out of the personal realm. And yes, as a code owner, I care about processes. I try to care about the scope of project releases, I try to care about the way we work, and I try to keep discussions separate when possible, because in my experience, and especially in my past experience in this WG, that's the best way to get results.
And as for the part where you say that I don't discuss content, please take a look at the posting history of this WG, I can guarantee you that I have discussed content a lot. So that's pretty unfair. 

>I agree that putting sender-constraint assertions into the document from https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/113 would make that document harder to comprehend. It is already very long and hard to review because the differences to the standards are not clearly marked.

We pretty much know DT's position on the document format, these kinds of comments are starting to be quite disrespectful.

>If we continue with the https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/113 approach, we would probaly need to repeat DPop and also add text about sender-constraint assertions.

As explained in the call and by my colleague @palmerabollo, we can actually forget about the format of the document itself (Mobile Connect profile is a word document for example). We just need to make sure that the OIDC profile we create contains all the necessary information to ensure interoperability of CAMARA implementations. That's the goal and nothing else. Having said that, I don't mind using DT's PR as a reference as long as it includes and solves all interoperability issues. And of course, if we keep topics not discussed yet for a next release, I think that is fair.

> With this short and concise document adding sender-constraint assertions is no big deal which improves Camara security incredibly.

As recommended in the last call, to add something that hasn't been discussed before, there should be consensus in the working group, right? The same applies here, and to do that we need to open this issue for discussion for the next release. I would recommend opening specific issues on github for this, and including a v0.3.0 tag to properly identify them.

> Of course, only if WG members agree and support sender-constraint assertions implemented using DPop.

Of course, indeed.

Author: Sorry, I did not mean to be disrespectful.

Author: To the topic of sender-constraint access token and PKCE requirements: I am going to remove these security improving requirements. I expect these topics are going to be put in issues and PR after this PR is merged

Author: removed

### DPoP Requirements for Camara Clients

Camara clients SHOULD utilize DPoP as described in [RFC9449].

If Camara clients use DPoP, they shall support the server provided nonce mechanism (as defined in Section 8 of [RFC9449])

### DPoP Requirements for Camara Authorizatin Servers

Camara Authorization Servers MUST support DPoP as described in [RFC9449].

### DPoP Requirements for Resource Servers

> Camara Resource Servers MUST support and verify sender-constrained access tokens using DPoP as described in [RFC9449].

Reviewer 2: Thanks. As I say in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/issues/122#issuecomment-1945931102 this would be my recommendation to move forward:

> 1. Remove extra features that have not even been discussed yet (DPOP, PKCE) from https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/121, to compare apples to apples. Open separate issues to discuss each new feature as separate track.
> 2. In parallel, give 1-2 weeks to gather all the issues we currently have in production due to different interpretations of the RFCs. Review whether they are solved in
https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/113 and
https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/121. Fix them otherwise.
> 3. Choose one option. I don't have a strong opinion as long as they are complete and reflect our current agreements + clarifications needed to avoid repeating the same issues that have caused we (CSPs) are not 100% interoperable.

> I think no harm is done by recommending better security.

Well, everything has pros and cons. DPoP is not a "small recommendation". It comes with a significant impact on Authorization Servers, Applications, and API Gateways... This is why it shouldn't come out of the blue, mixing the debate about the profile with whether DPoP is a good addition or not.

> Camara Resource Servers MUST support and verify sender-constrained access tokens using DPoP as described in [RFC9449].

Author: I removed the section on sender-constraint access tokens

* [RFC 2617 - HTTP Authentication: Basic and Digest Access Authentication](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2617)
* [RFC 3986 - Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3986)
* [RFC 3966 - The tel URI for Telephone Numbers](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3966)
* [RFC 6749 - The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6749)
* [RFC 7515 - JSON Web Signature (JWS)](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7515)
* [RFC 7519 - JSON Web Token (JWT)](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7519)
* [RFC 7521 - Assertion Framework for OAuth 2.0 Client Authentication and Authorization Grants](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7521)
* [RFC 7523 - JSON Web Token (JWT) Profile for OAuth 2.0 Client Authentication and Authorization Grants](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7523)
* [RFC 8259 - The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data Interchange Format](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8259)
* [RFC 8414 - OAuth 2.0 Authorization Server Metadata](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8414)
* [RFC 9449 - OAuth 2.0 Demonstrating Proof of Possession (DPoP)](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9449)

> 

Reviewer 2: This PR barely adds anything over the current situation. Simply saying "read and implement the RFC" sounds good in theory. However, that is the current strategy and has proven to be problematic in practice (this is why we decided we need a profile in the first place).

To illustrate it with two recent cases:

- The RFC states, "OpenID Connect requests MUST contain the **openid scope** value. If the openid scope value is not present, the behavior is entirely unspecified." This lack of clarity led to issues in OpenGateway because one CSP in Europe argued that the text is open to not sending the scope. The result: some telcos are not interoperable due to differing interpretations, and the aggregator must adapt the requests to the telco using the less-restrictive interpretation. To address this, #113 proposes a more detailed profile stating, "OpenID Connect requests MUST contain the openid scope value. If the openid scope value is not present, the ID Token will not be returned," leaving no room for interpretation.
- Another issue concerns the usage of **acr_values**. According to the current profile, sending them is optional. However, at least two telcos in OpenGateway are using different values, causing interoperability issues. Standardizing the possible acr values is necessary to ensure developers can build apps that work across different telcos. This is why #113 does not include that field (until we standardize it if needed).

These are real examples, not fabricated. I'm omiting the telco names, but they are represented in this working group, so they can add their point of view.

The debate shouldn't focus on "delta" versus "self-contained" profiles but rather on determining the appropriate level of detail to prevent issues arising from differing interpretations of the standard. Both profiles should be able to converge if we agree on a level of detail that leaves no room for interpretations.

Author: I commited https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/121/commits/89311752fb43c761762869de818fbe719448afe7 addressing the missing scope value openid.

This document exists to improve interoperability. Defining the AZ's behavior in cases where OIDC says "unspecified" fits perfectly. If ICM does not agree with returning BAD REQUEST if openid is missing then please suggest alternative text.

Author: Thanks for pointing out the interoperability issues resp acr_values. I hope this commit improves interoperability for Carama
https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/121/commits/99a44743e5f4f24679b6155177aadd566e7d6789

### Purpose as part of scope

To improve interoperablitiy this document RECOMMENDS that API Working groups define scope values following this scheme:

`dpv:<dpvValue>#<technical_scope>`

- `<dpvValue>` is coming from [W3C DPV purpose definition](https://w3c.github.io/dpv/dpv/#vocab-purpose)
- `<technical_scope>` some technical scope needed by the Camara API

This document does not change OIDC definitions of scope values.

## Missing "openid" scope

[OIDC Core Authentication Request](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthRequest) states the following about the value of scope.
> REQUIRED. OpenID Connect requests MUST contain the openid scope value. If the openid scope value is not present, the behavior is entirely unspecified. Other scope values MAY be present. ...

This document defines the following error handling for a missing "openid" value in scope. 
Please refer to [Authentication Error Response](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthError).

If "openid" is missing in the scope value, the Authorization Server returns an HTTP response code of 400 (Bad Request) and an error invalid_request.

## ID Token sub claim

> The subject identifier must be globally unique identifier and a case-sensitive ASCII string with a maximum length of 255. The sub value MUST not contain the MSISDN. Within Camara this is populated by a Pseudonymous Customer Reference (PCR) which is a system-facing unique identifier that links a User’s MSISDN/IP-Address to a ASP. It is generated by the OP.

Reviewer 4: If you are going to insist that the subject identifier be a "globally unique identifier" called the "Pseudonymous Customer Reference" then you need to specify how to compute that. For otherwise, how can any API provider be sure that the PCR they have generated will not also be generated by a different provider for a different end user?

Also, it is very important to note that an "end user" in the context of a CAMARA API may not have an MSISDN, and is unlikely to have a static IP address. So the PCR calculation method needs to take into account all the end user identifiers that an API provider may be using.

But I think it would be easier simply to require that the subject identifier be locally unique to a given API provider.

Author: I agree with being against a globally unique id because that enables user tracking and cross-domain user profile building.

OIDC has PPID
```text
Pairwise Pseudonymous Identifier (PPID)
    Identifier that identifies the Entity to a Relying Party that cannot be correlated with the Entity's PPID at another Relying Party. 
```

And also
```
17.3.  Correlation

To protect the End-User from possible correlation among Clients, the use of a Pairwise Pseudonymous Identifier (PPID) as the sub (subject) SHOULD be considered. 
```

And also [Pairwise Identifier Algorithm](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#PairwiseAlg)

If parties want/need to share PPID they can use the above PairwiseAlg and one sector identifier.

Not sure whether this is a Camara concern.

I am going to change this section now

Author: Amended ID Token sub claim

Reviewer 5: I think that right now we will not be able to support pairwise identifiers with sector_identifier_uri because this field is not included in the current version of the TMForum Operate API (v5) for client provisioning.

Author: > I think that right now we will not be able to support pairwise identifiers with `sector_identifier_uri` because this field is not included in the current version of the TMForum Operate API (v5) for client provisioning.

This profile does not mandate PPID. @garciasolero is the current text OK for you?

Reviewer 5: The current text of the profile says: _This document defines that the sub claim **MUST** be a Pairwise Pseudonymous Identifier (PPID)_. Therefore, it requires the use of PPID.

Author: Sorry, I meant does not mandate an certain PPID algorithm. PPID per se should not be a problem, right?
PPID means that two different client ids get different sub values preventing them from using sub for correlation even if the two clients collude.

Reviewer 5: We agree that identifiers should preferably be pairwise. But implementing them is not a straightforward task in those existing solutions that use public identifiers. It could potentially cause issues with existing integrations. Therefore, in those cases, having support for that functionality is unlikely to be available in the short term.

## Audience

The target audience for this document is the service/technical departments of operators exposing network functions via standard CAMARA APIs. And applications or client systems that consume CAMARA standard APIs to make use of the operator's network capabilities.

## Conventions

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

## General Considerations

### Transport Security
All network connections MUST use TLS 1.2 or better.

## OIDC Authorization Code Flow

The OIDC Authorization Code Flow is defined in [OpenID Connect](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html)

### Cross-Site Request Forgery Protection

CAMARA REQUIRES cross-site request forgery protection.

CAMARA RECOMMENDS PKCE for CSRF protection. 
CAMARA Authorization Servers MUST implement PKCE. If PKCE is not used by the Client then the CAMARA AZ must handle **state** and **nonce** as defined in OAuth2.

> 

Reviewer 6: As of now inoAuth2.0 PKCE is not mandatory. 
Please rephrase MUST to recommended.

Author: done

The client MUST authenticate with the authorization server as described in [Client Authentication Section](#client-authentication).

## Client Credentials Flow

The [OAuth 2.0 Client Credentials](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-4.4) grant type is used to obtain a 2-legged Access Token that does not represent a user. This grant type can only be used when no personal user data is processed, and it is only a valid option to access the CAMARA APIs for these specific scenarios.

### Access Token Request

This CAMARA document makes the scope parameter REQUIRED for the OAuth2 Client Credentials Grant.

The client MUST authenticate with the authorization server as described in [Client Authentication Section](#client-authentication).

## The Scope Parameter

Scope values determine the specific CAMARA services being requested by the Service Provider, subject to the SP being registered to use those services. The scope values must be documented in the API OAS files by all Camara API subprojects.

> 

Reviewer 6: Please add a statement about the general handling of an access token and scope:

Access tokens are intended to convey information about permitted scopes to the resource server and therefor must be shared with the resource servers (either as opaque tokens or self contained jwt tokens).

Author: Isn't that the whole purpose of access tokens for API access at a resource servers? The whole purpose of OAuth2 and OIDC is getting access tokens. 

I am astonished that somebody might see this differently. 

That sounds a little like the interpretation regarding scope where OIDC defined that the value "openid" is a MUST and some telco interpreted the "unspefied behaviour" if "openid" is missing that "openid" is not a MUST.

Back to access tokens: @Elisabeth-Ericsson do we need this? Seems obvious to me but please enlighten me

Reviewer 4: CAMARA does not define internal API implementations, and so should stick to specifying interfaces and interface behaviour, and not try to second guess API provider implementations. Provider implementations should be treated as a "black box" and behaviour that cannot be tested externally should not be specified.

Feel free to write as many "best practice" documents as you like, but CAMARA needs to be clear as to what is a "standard" (i.e. a requirement) and what is only guidance. If a provider implementation is insecure, that is an issue for them and their internal security team.

Author: I agree with @eric-murray (under the assumption that I understood him correctly):

Suppose we have gateway/aggregator and behind that 2 telcos t1 and t1. From a client PoV the gateway might implement both the AZ and the RS for an API which "behind the scenes" is implemented by t1 and t2 by protocol p1 and p2 which are not necessarily the same as the Camara API. 
Not that I would recommend such a scenario but I think this happens t1 having their technical debt and t2 as well.
This setup might be secure - who knows. The access token might be exchanged to internal access tokens. Who knows. There might be performance reasons for this token transformation.

I think Camara should probably not care.

@Elisabeth-Ericsson resolve this conversation?

Reviewer 6: Camara defines APIs and protocols to call APIs. There will be situations where L1 APIs are delivered by vendors as well as service exposure platforms. L1 service implementations require the information about access tokens. Therefore it must be assured that this information is sent to the L1 services. 
I recommend to add the hint, I proposed initially. This hint does not talk about a physical format or a potential token exchange. Proposed text is:
_Access tokens are intended to convey information about permitted scopes to the resource server and therefor must be shared with the resource servers (eventually as opaque tokens or self contained jwt tokens)._

Reviewer 4: @Elisabeth-Ericsson
If the proposed text contains a "must", then it is a requirement, not a "hint". And if it is a requirement, then the specification needs to be very clear as to what a "resource server" is. With the current definition, some implementations will not have an identifiable "resource server".

Reviewer 6: Oh sorry, my mistake. You are perfectly right.  I should have stated: _should be shared_

Proposed text is:
Access tokens are intended to convey information about permitted scopes to the resource server and therefor should be shared with the resource servers (eventually as opaque tokens or self contained jwt tokens).

Reviewer 6: @eric-murray: would you be fine with the phrasing: 
Access tokens are intended to convey information about permitted scopes to the resource server respectively the API implementations and therefor should be shared with them (eventually as opaque tokens or self contained jwt tokens) such that they can be validated and evaluated in the API logic.

Reviewer 6: Thank you for your close review. I fixed the type'o.

Author: I think that the whole purpose of OAuth2/OIDC access tokens is to be send to API consumers to be validated and evaluated. So everybody implementing an OAuth2 RS should know.
There are cases where the actual API implementation predates OAuth2 and the access token is consumed by what the client sees as RS but the real API consumer - the implementation - is some SOAP thingy. That is not so uncommon in the telco environment. New implementations should be OAuth2 of course.

From a Camara client perspective the access token MUST be send to the RS. Whether the access token ends up at the _real_ implementation is a different matter.

If you think this implementation advice is helpful, maybe it should be in a different document?

Author: I added a note about this to the document. Hope that resolves this conversation. @Elisabeth-Ericsson

OIDC also defines that the parameter acr_values is OPTIONAL and does not specify possible values. This leads to interoperability issues.

This documents defines that Camara OpenId Providers MUST ignore the parameter acr_values. 

This document defines that Camara Clients SHOULD not use the acr_values parameter. 

> To foster interoperability a future version of this document might define values for the acr_values parameter acceptable in Camara.

## Access Token Request

This CAMARA document makes the scope parameter REQUIRED for the OAuth2 Client Credentials Grant.

The client MUST authenticate with the authorization server as described in [Client Authentication Section](#client-authentication).

## The Scope Parameter

Scope values determine the specific CAMARA services being requested by the Service Provider, subject to the SP being registered to use those services. The scope values must be documented in the API OAS files by all Camara API subprojects. This document does not change OIDC definitions of scope values.

> 

Author: The access token is conveyed to the RS, because otherwise the RS cannot decide whether access should be granted or not. These authorization enforcement must also include scopes if the API defines scopes.

If after an RS has made the authorization decision scopes and other information from the access token is not forwarded to the actual API implementation, then this is not a Camara problem to be handled in ICM, I think.

Communication with the Backchannel Authentication Endpoint MUST utilize TLS.

CIBA allows the Client to get the authentication result in three ways: poll, ping, or push. This profile allows clients to use the *poll* mode. In the Poll mode, the authentication result is retrieved by the Client by polling the OP's token endpoint using the new grant type. 

### Authentication Request

This CAMARA document makes the login_hint parameter REQUIRED if CIBA is used in a CAMARA context.

This CAMARA document clarifies the values used in login_hint in the following way:

    * **_tel_**

      For phone numbers. The `login_hint` must be a tel URI as defined in [RFC 3966](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3966) for global phone numbers without visual separators in [E.164](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-E.164-201011-I/en) format. For example, `tel:+34666666666`.

    * **_ipport_**

      For IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, that can optionally include a port. For example, `ipport:80.90.34.2:16790`, `ipport:80.90.34.2`, `ipport:[2001:db8::1]:8080` or `ipport:[2001:db8::1]`.

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The following optional [CIBA authentication request parameters](https://openid.net/specs/openid-client-initiated-backchannel-authentication-core-1_0.html#rfc.section.7.1) are not supported in Camara:

- user_code 
- binding_message
- id_token_hint
- login_hint_token
- requested_expiry 

```

## Table of Contents
<!-- TOC -->
* Introduction
* Audience
* Conventions
* General Considerations
  *  Transport Security
* OIDC Authorization Code Flow
  *  Cross-Site Request Forgery Protection
* Client-Initiated Backchannel Authentication Flow
  *  Authentication Request
* Client Credentials Flow
* Handling of acr_values
* Access Token Request
* The Scope Parameter
* Missing "openid" scope
* Purpose
* ID Token sub claim
* Client Authentication
* OpenId Foundation Certification
* References
<!-- TOC -->

## Introduction

This document is the CAMARA Security and Interoperability Profile. To ensure interoperability and increased security, this technical specification restricts some options available in OIDC and CIBA, but does not change these standards.

The CAMARA document sharpens the following for interoperability and security: 

* Of the flows defined in OIDC CAMARA uses the [OIDC Authorization Code Flow](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#CodeFlowAuth)

* Scope Parameter. Recommendations about the format of the scope parameter used in  CAMARA APIs.

* Client Authentication. Specifications for client authentication within CAMARA.

> 

Reviewer 6: Please consider as resolved.

## Conventions

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

## General Considerations

### Transport Security
All network connections MUST use TLS 1.2 or better.

## OIDC Authorization Code Flow

The OIDC Authorization Code Flow is defined in [OpenID Connect](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html)

### Cross-Site Request Forgery Protection

CAMARA REQUIRES cross-site request forgery protection.

CAMARA RECOMMENDS PKCE for CSRF protection. 
CAMARA Authorization Servers SHOULD implement PKCE. If PKCE is not used by the Client then the CAMARA AZ must handle **state** and **nonce** as defined in OAuth2.

CAMARA Clients SHOULD use PKCE if the CAMARA AZ supports PKCE.

If nonce for CSRF-protection is used then implementers must ensure that sufficient entropy is present in the nonce value.
Please see [OAuth 2.0 Security Best Current Practice](https://oauthstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics/draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics.html#name-protecting-redirect-based-f).

> ### Offline Access

Reviewer 3: This section should be revisited with whatever we end up agreeing on in the PR #123 discussion (see https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/123#issuecomment-1966319812).

Author: @jpengar I just proposed/asked in a [review comment ](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/123#discussion_r1504134748)to close PR https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/123 and have the #121 text here and not in documentation/CAMARA-API-access-and-user-consent.md

Reviewer 3: > @jpengar I just proposed/asked in a https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/123#discussion_r1504134748to close PR https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/123 and have the https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/121 text here and not in documentation/CAMARA-API-access-and-user-consent.md

We can discuss this in PR https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/123. But first, please see my comments in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/123#issuecomment-1966319812 regarding the proposed text content to be added to the OIDC profile regarding offline access. I don't agree with all of the proposed text.

>    MUST ignore the offline_access request unless the Client is using a response_type value that would result in an Authorization Code being returned,

>    MUST explicitly receive or have consent for offline access when the registered application_type is web,

>    SHOULD explicitly receive or have consent for offline access when the registered application_type is native.

The OIDC section on [OIDC Using Refresh Tokens](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshTokens) is not changed by this document.

The OIDC security and privacy considerations regarding offline access and refresh tokens apply e.g. on
[Token lifetime](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#TokenLifetime) and [Offline Access Privacy](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#OfflineAccessPrivacy).

## Client-Initiated Backchannel Authentication Flow

The [Client-Initiated Backchannel Authentication (CIBA)](https://openid.net/specs/openid-client-initiated-backchannel-authentication-core-1_0.html) flow is used to initiate an out-of-band authentication of the end-user.

Communication with the Backchannel Authentication Endpoint MUST utilize TLS.

> CIBA allows the Client to get the authentication result in three ways: poll, ping, or push. This profile allows clients to use the *poll* mode. In the Poll mode, the authentication result is retrieved by the Client by polling the OP's token endpoint using the new grant type. 

Reviewer 8: Shouldn't we consider having _push_ mode acceptable as well? From _performance_ perspective it works better than poll.

### Authentication Request

> This CAMARA document makes the login_hint parameter REQUIRED if CIBA is used in a CAMARA context.

Reviewer 8: I would reconsider mandating this query param.

In Number Verification & SimSwap API services it is required to pass mobile phone number in resource requests to complete the flow:
[simSwap API](https://github.com/camaraproject/SimSwap/blob/ddc3cc10fbeaa693dff935e783a2ea3050c7daf4/code/API_definitions/sim_swap.yaml#L209)
[numberVerification API](https://github.com/camaraproject/NumberVerification/blob/1a4bf7267c96f90874a87dff79e05fa845a0b6f5/code/API_definitions/CAMARA/number_verification.yaml#L158)

OIDC spec keeps this query param as OPTIONAL - it makes sense as it gives sub-projects some freedom to utilize it.

On the other hand - for CIBA _login_hint_ has to be mandated :)

Therefore a question: Is this section describes _generic_ Authorization Request, that works for both _CIBA_ & _auth_code grant flow_ ? If yes - some more context should be given to this section.

This CAMARA document clarifies the values used in login_hint in the following way:

    * **_tel_**

      For phone numbers. The `login_hint` must be a tel URI as defined in [RFC 3966](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3966) for global phone numbers without visual separators in [E.164](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-E.164-201011-I/en) format. For example, `tel:+34666666666`.

    * **_ipport_**

      For IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, that can optionally include a port. For example, `ipport:80.90.34.2:16790`, `ipport:80.90.34.2`, `ipport:[2001:db8::1]:8080` or `ipport:[2001:db8::1]`.

> The client MUST authenticate with the authorization server as described in [Client Authentication Section](#client-authentication).

Reviewer 8: shouldn't we be more specific here?

## Client Credentials Flow

> The [OAuth 2.0 Client Credentials](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-4.4) grant type is used to obtain a 2-legged Access Token that does not represent a user. This grant type can only be used when no personal user data is processed, and it is only a valid option to access the CAMARA APIs for these specific scenarios.

Reviewer 8: I think that this [PR](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/120/files) enabled Camara API services sub-projects to allow some specific API invokers to consume APIs based on client credentials. So it looks that for some specific clients, CSP can apply client credentials flow, even for API services that results in sharing end-user characteristics, e.g. SimSwap or KYC Match.

Reviewer 3: I think that what the Identity & Consent Working Group mandates regarding client credentials is 100% clear.  **This permission type can only be used when no personal user data is processed, and it is only a valid way to access the CAMARA APIs for those specific scenarios**. It has been clarified many times, and this policy applies to the CAMARA API subproject as a commonality.

https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/120/files was NOT intended to change the working group's criteria for when client credentials can be used. So trying to misinterpret this text in order to circumvent the working group's guidelines is not the way to go.

CC @AxelNennker @Elisabeth-Ericsson

Reviewer 3: In fact, there is a clear [documented guideline](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/main/documentation/CAMARA-API-access-and-user-consent.md#mandatory-template-for-infodescription-in-camara-api-specs) as well for all CAMARA API subprojects to adopt ASAP to be aligned with WG to include in info.description property in the CAMARA API specs:

--

>### Authorization and authentication
>
>CAMARA guidelines defines a set of authorization flows which can grant API clients access to the API functionality, as outlined in the document [CAMARA-API-access-and-user-consent.md](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/main/documentation/CAMARA-API-access-and-user-consent.md). Which specific authorization flows are to be used will be determined during onboarding process, happening between the API Client and the Telco Operator exposing the API, taking into account the declared purpose for accessing the API, while also being subject to the prevailing legal framework dictated by local legislation.
>
>**It is important to remark that in cases where personal user data is processed by the API, and users can exercise their rights through mechanisms such as opt-in and/or opt-out, the use of 3-legged access tokens becomes mandatory. This measure ensures that the API remains in strict compliance with user privacy preferences and regulatory obligations, upholding the principles of transparency and user-centric data control.**

Reviewer 9: @jpengar @DT-DawidWroblewski 

Ee should be careful not to introduce different statements within the different documents. The agreed guidelines says (highlighting by me):

> It is important to remark that in cases where personal user data is processed by the API, **and** users can exercise their rights through mechanisms such as opt-in and/or opt-out, the use of 3-legged access tokens becomes mandatory

Which means that there could be cases, where personal user data is processed, but users have no options to exercise (e.g. if the processing is required by law). In these cases 3-legged might be not mandatory.

But the sentence above in the PR

> This grant type can only be used when no personal user data is processed, and it is only a valid option to access the CAMARA APIs for these specific scenarios.

would exclude such cases. It also misses the reference to "being subject to the prevailing legal framework dictated by local legislation".

My recommendation is to not discuss the use cases of valid client credentials here again, but delete it here and add a reference to the agreed guideline.

Reviewer 9: An alternative could be, to copy the full and correct statement. But not a shortened one which is changing the semantic.

Reviewer 3: Yes @hdamker. The agreed condition for the use of client credentials grant type is more restrictive than, but aligned with, the CAMARA community agreement on 2-legged vs. 3-legged access.

Context:
This issue was discussed here https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/issues/92 and I specifically mentioned something very similar to what you say above here https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/issues/92#issuecomment-1852448418. And then it was mentioned here https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/issues/92#issuecomment-1862432886 that if the WG only considers client credentials when no personal information is processed, that would be fine because it is indeed more restrictive. And then, in light of that condition, @eric-murray updated the documentation accordingly (PR https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/109), which refers to not requiring the purpose statement when client credentials is used (purpose must be always declared when personal information is processed as required by law).

Reviewer 9: @jpengar @eric-murray I wasn't aware of this restrictive change done in a side discussion. For me the broadly discussed, reviewed and agreed clear [documented guideline](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/main/documentation/CAMARA-API-access-and-user-consent.md#mandatory-template-for-infodescription-in-camara-api-specs) is still valid. The text is here very clear:

> Which specific authorization flows are to be used will be determined during onboarding process, happening between the API Client and the Telco Operator exposing the API, taking into account the declared purpose for accessing the API, while also being subject to the prevailing legal framework dictated by local legislation.

So purpose for accessing the API can be already declared within the onboarding.

I would therefore ask to keep all documents in accordance with this agreement. It shouldn't be overruled by a PR reviewed and merged by one person.

Reviewer 4: @hdamker
Well, not a "side discussion" as the issue and then PR submission followed the agreed procedures, and was formally approved during a [meeting](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/main/documentation/MeetingMinutes/2024/MOM-2024-01-17.md). And hardly even a "[discussion](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/commit/7675e3e027b594cdf16bbced5374a131f0cc840e)". Including this additional statement was the price of getting an agreement on scope formation when using the client_credentials grant.

I'm not a fan of including such "narrative" text in specifications for precisely this reason. If you believe the added text contradicts statements made elsewhere in the document, then I'd be more than happy to revert to the original PR text.

Reviewer 9: @eric-murray 
Looking on the [minutes](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/main/documentation/MeetingMinutes/2024/MOM-2024-01-17.md) I can't imagine that it was discussed in detail before the "agreement". Also the commit was done just a day before the meeting, so there was no sufficient time to review and assume a consensus. Given that the previous consensus which was changed here "on the side" (as this was not the subject of the issue and the PR) was discussed over weeks and reviewed by many people, I wouldn't consider this an appropriate way to change such consensus.

Yes, I will open an issue to revert to your original PR text, in line with our mandatory guideline.

Reviewer 3: @eric-murray @hdamker 

I'm not going to go back over the procedures that were followed, or discuss comments like _"It shouldn't be overruled by a PR that was reviewed and merged by one person_ (thanks for remove it @hdamker) . I already find them quite disrespectful, so I'm pretty sure that everything will be done much better from now on. It looks like I was in different meetings and different discussions than you guys. I don't know :/

I'm absolutely fine to revisit this topic, but please note that the change requested in this PR with respect to the original text was because otherwise there could be scenarios where personal information is processed (with no opt-in or opt-out) where customer credentials would be allowed but the purpose is not declared. 

From Telefónica's point of view, the purpose must always be declared when processing personal data (this is what the GDPR requires). So, it's not just a matter of going back to Eric's original PR text, but also of reconsidering whether the purpose needs to be declared when client credentials are used but users' personal data is processed. IMHO, it needs to be declared in those cases, so Eric's original PR text would be against it.

Reviewer 9: https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/issues/131 created for the statement introduced by #92. We shouldn't repeat here the same mistake.

Reviewer 9: @jpengar 

> From Telefónica's point of view, the purpose must always be declared when processing personal data (this is what the GDPR requires). So, it's not just a matter of going back to Eric's original PR text, but also of reconsidering whether the purpose needs to be declared when client credentials is used but user's personal data is processed. IMHO, it needs to be declared in those cases, so Eric's original PR text would be against it.

There is now #131 which is better suited for this discussion. Would you like to repeat the argument there?

Reviewer 9: I suppose this conversation can be set to resolved. @DT-DawidWroblewski @AxelNennker 

The commented text has been updated by https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/121/commits/7f5f42f5271c74f94b15564bc1ebbed21a7803fe and is now in line with our [documented guideline](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/main/documentation/CAMARA-API-access-and-user-consent.md#mandatory-template-for-infodescription-in-camara-api-specs).

> The [OAuth 2.0 Client Credentials](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-4.4) grant type is used to obtain a 2-legged Access Token that does not represent a user. This grant type can only be used when no personal user data is processed, and it is only a valid option to access the CAMARA APIs for these specific scenarios.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
The [OAuth 2.0 Client Credentials](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-4.4) grant type is used to obtain a 2-legged Access Token that does not represent a user. The grant-type can only be used if agreed between between the API Client and the Telco Operator exposing the API, taking into account the declared purpose for accessing the API (cf. [CAMARA API Specification - Authorization and authentication common guidelines](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/main/documentation/CAMARA-API-access-and-user-consent.md#camara-api-specification---authorization-and-authentication-common-guidelines))
```

The purpose string MUST use below format for interoperability

`dpv:<dpvValue>` 

`<dpvValue>` is coming from [W3C DPV purpose definition](https://w3c.github.io/dpv/dpv/#vocab-purpose)

## ID Token sub claim

To prevent [correlation](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#Correlation) OIDC recommends that the sub claim is a [Pairwise Pseudonymous Identifier (PPID)](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#Terminology).

This document defines that the sub claim MUST be a Pairwise Pseudonymous Identifier (PPID).

The PPID MUST not contain Personally Identifiable Information (PII) such as the MSISDN.
If the PPID is based on PII then it must be hard for an attacker to reverse the PPID and reveal the PII.

OIDC discusses [Pairwise Identifier Algorithms](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#PairwiseAlg).

This document does not mandate a particular PPID algorithm to be used.

## Client Authentication

> This CAMARA document allows **one** client authentication method, private_key_jwt, as defined in OIDC

Reviewer 8: SimSwap deployment on prod faced _Client authentication challenge_ due to a lack of a common approach to request handling and client authentication solution.

If we mandate here _private_key_jwt_ then let's use it across CAMARA API in sub-projects that requires out-of-the band end-user authentication & consent acquisition. Additionally, we should have an agreement on _request object claims_ definition, as as described [in CIBA spec - signed auth request](https://openid.net/specs/openid-client-initiated-backchannel-authentication-core-1_0.html#signed_auth_request)

Reviewer 3: The CAMARA OIDC profile, which is currently being defined, is precisely intended to solve these implementation problems and interoperability issues. Profiling specific CAMARA behaviors and definitions we all eventually agree.

Author: Improving interoperability and security regarding user authentication and user consent is exactly the purpose of the icm work.

## The Scope Parameter

Scope values determine the specific CAMARA services being requested by the Service Provider, subject to the SP being registered to use those services. The scope values must be documented in the API OAS files by all Camara API subprojects. This document does not change OIDC definitions of scope values.

---
**NOTE**

Scope values are an integral part of any OAuth2 and OIDC implementation. The RS enforces API access based on scope (if the Camara API subproject defines scopes).
Therefore scopes should be available to API implementations.

---

## Missing "openid" scope

[OIDC Core Authentication Request](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthRequest) states the following about the value of scope.
> REQUIRED. OpenID Connect requests MUST contain the openid scope value. If the openid scope value is not present, the behavior is entirely unspecified. Other scope values MAY be present. ...

This document defines the following error handling for a missing "openid" value in scope. 
Please refer to [Authentication Error Response](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthError).

> If "openid" is missing in the scope value, the Authorization Server returns an HTTP response code of 400 (Bad Request) and an error invalid_request.

Reviewer 5: Regarding the behavior of missing the `openid` scope, returning an `invalid_request` error can indeed impact on implementations where both OAuth2 and OIDC solutions coexist. Perhaps not returning the `id_token` ensures better interoperability.

Reviewer 5: We are not saying not to use OIDC; we are saying that you cannot force an `invalid_request` error to be returned if `openid` is not sent when the standard states that the behavior is _entirely unspecified_, even though it is a required parameter value. If we were to return `invalid_request`, it would impact on authservers where both OIDC and OAuth2 solutions coexist. 

As a client, you SHOULD send the `openid` scope. However, if you do not send it, it is your responsibility because the behavior may vary across already deployed implementations.

## Purpose

A transaction specific request parameter purpose as specified in [openid-connect-4-identity-assurance-1_0-13](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-4-identity-assurance-1_0.html#name-transaction-specific-purpos) MUST be used to allow a SP to state the purpose for the transfer of End-User data it is asking for.
The purpose string MUST use below format for interoperability

`dpv:<dpvValue>` 

`<dpvValue>` is coming from [W3C DPV purpose definition](https://w3c.github.io/dpv/dpv/#vocab-purpose)

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
## ID Token
Camara uses ID Token as defined in [OpenID Connect Core 1.0 incorporating errata set 2](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#CodeIDToken). As the specs describe, the ID Token's aud ( Audience) claim specifies who this ID Token is intended for and that it MUST contain the OAuth 2.0 client_id of the Relying Party as an audience value.
```

Reviewer 5: I think it is good to reference the ID Token section in OIDC. However, for the part where it refers to the `aud` claim, it does not say anything different from what the standard already states, so I would not include it. If we start adding things like that, the document will end up looking more and more like a self-contained profile.

Reviewer 7: @garciasolero Updated based on your comment.

Author: Please see https://github.com/AxelNennker/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/camara_oidc_profile/documentation/CAMARA-Security-Interoperability.md#id-token

# CAMARA Security and Interoperability Profile

> ## Table of Contents
> <!-- TOC -->
> * Introduction
> * Audience
> * Conventions
> * General Considerations
>   *  Transport Security
> * OIDC Authorization Code Flow
>   *  Cross-Site Request Forgery Protection
> * Client-Initiated Backchannel Authentication Flow
>   *  Authentication Request
> * Client Credentials Flow
> * Handling of acr_values
> * Access Token Request
> * The Scope Parameter
> * Missing "openid" scope
> * Purpose
> * ID Token sub claim
> * Client Authentication
> * OpenId Foundation Certification
> * References
> <!-- TOC -->

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Table of Contents

  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [Audience](#audience)
  - [Conventions](#conventions)
  - [General Considerations](#general-considerations)
    - [Transport Security](#transport-security)
  - [OIDC Authorization Code Flow](#oidc-authorization-code-flow)
    - [Cross-Site Request Forgery Protection](#cross-site-request-forgery-protection)
  - [Client-Initiated Backchannel Authentication Flow](#client-initiated-backchannel-authentication-flow)
    - [Authentication Request](#authentication-request)
  - [Offline Access](#offline-access)
      - [Refresh Token Issuance](#refresh-token-issuance)
    - [Refresh Token Usage](#refresh-token-usage)
    - [Refresh Token Error Response](#refresh-token-error-response)
    - [Refresh Token Security](#refresh-token-security)
  - [Client Credentials Flow](#client-credentials-flow)
  - [Handling of acr\_values](#handling-of-acr_values)
  - [Access Token Request](#access-token-request)
  - [The Scope Parameter](#the-scope-parameter)
  - [Missing "openid" scope](#missing-openid-scope)
  - [Purpose](#purpose)
  - [ID Token sub claim](#id-token-sub-claim)
  - [Client Authentication](#client-authentication)
  - [OpenId Foundation Certification](#openid-foundation-certification)
  - [References](#references)
```

@AxelNennker Please ignore my suggestion if you want to use a different format for the table of contents. But at least the table should be updated according to the latest changes in the doc content. Thank you very much!

OIDC defines the scope `offline_access` and it is used to get an access token to be used at the UserInfo endpoint, and also to obtain a request token to refresh this access token.

---

The OIDC rules for `offline_access` as defined in [OIDC Offline Access](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#OfflineAccess) apply. 

The OIDC section on [OIDC Using Refresh Tokens](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshTokens) is not changed by this document.

The OIDC security and privacy considerations regarding offline access and refresh tokens apply e.g. on
[Token lifetime](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#TokenLifetime) and [Offline Access Privacy](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#OfflineAccessPrivacy).

### Refresh Token Usage

This section applies to OIDC Authorization Code Flow and CIBA. Other flows do not need refresh tokens and MUST not use refresh tokens.

In addition to [OIDC Using Refresh Tokens](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshTokens) and [OAuth2 Refreshing an Access Token](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-6) this document defines the following:

>     The authorization decisions for issuing an access token MUST be re-checked by the Authorization Server when a refresh token is used. 

Reviewer 10: When the consent is revoked by the user, we can utilize the following RFC to revoke the access token and refresh token: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7009

Author: Thanks @izahirclemencia , please creeate a separate issue for a standardized way for revoking tokens. I think that is valueable.
There we can also discuss whether token revocation is for the "profile" or a separate document.

        * A new access token MUST not be issued if the user has revoked their consent.
        * A new access token MUST not be issued if the client status regarding the requested API access has changed.

### Refresh Token Error Response

> In addition to [OIDC Refresh Error Response](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshErrorResponse) and [OAuth2 Issuing Access Token Error Response](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.2) this document requires that the error `consent_required` MUST be used in the error response if user consent is required.

Author: I think the issue is that the links for the error point to somewhere where that error `consent_required`is not defined.

> In addition to [OIDC Refresh Error Response](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshErrorResponse) and [OAuth2 Issuing Access Token Error Response](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.2) this document requires that the error `consent_required` MUST be used in the error response if user consent is required.

Reviewer 5: For the [token endpoint](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.2), the most appropriate error allowed by the standard is `invalid_grant`, and it would behave as if the refresh token had been revoked.

> In addition to [OIDC Refresh Error Response](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshErrorResponse) and [OAuth2 Issuing Access Token Error Response](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.2) this document requires that the error `consent_required` MUST be used in the error response if user consent is required.

Author: Hi @garciasolero I updated the text.
I think the error code `consent_required` only makes sense when the client requests a new  access token using the refresh token. I removed the links. The first was meaningless anyway because it pointed to the second. And actually we can define any error code we want, as long as it not confusing.

Please review.
Axel

> In addition to [OIDC Refresh Error Response](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshErrorResponse) and [OAuth2 Issuing Access Token Error Response](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.2) this document requires that the error `consent_required` MUST be used in the error response if user consent is required.

Reviewer 5: Hi @AxelNennker,

Sure, we can add custom errors to our profile that are not part of the standard. However, I do not see the need for using the `consent_required` error when we already have an error (`invalid_grant`) in the standard that can be used when the user revokes consent. This way the application would behave similarly to when the refresh token has expired or been revoked, by requesting a new authorization.

> In addition to [OIDC Refresh Error Response](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshErrorResponse) and [OAuth2 Issuing Access Token Error Response](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.2) this document requires that the error `consent_required` MUST be used in the error response if user consent is required.

Author: Please review again. I wrote new text that uses [invalid_grant](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.2) instead of [consent_required](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthError).
Please do not hesitate using the +- button to suggest text.

### Refresh Token Security

Considering [OAuth2 Refresh Token Protection](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics#refresh_token_protection) this document RECOMMENDS using `Refresh token rotation`.

## Client Credentials Flow

> The [OAuth 2.0 Client Credentials](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-4.4) grant type is used to obtain a 2-legged Access Token that does not represent a user. The grant-type can only be used if agreed between between the API Client and the Telco Operator exposing the API, taking into account the declared purpose for accessing the API (cf. [CAMARA API Specification - Authorization and authentication common guidelines](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/main/documentation/CAMARA-API-access-and-user-consent.md#camara-api-specification---authorization-and-authentication-common-guidelines))

Reviewer 5: typo:

```suggestion
The [OAuth 2.0 Client Credentials](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-4.4) grant type is used to obtain a 2-legged Access Token that does not represent a user. The grant-type can only be used if agreed between the API Client and the Telco Operator exposing the API, taking into account the declared purpose for accessing the API (cf. [CAMARA API Specification - Authorization and authentication common guidelines](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/main/documentation/CAMARA-API-access-and-user-consent.md#camara-api-specification---authorization-and-authentication-common-guidelines))
```

CIBA allows the Client to get the authentication result in three ways: poll, ping, or push. This profile allows clients to use the *poll* mode. In the Poll mode, the authentication result is retrieved by the Client by polling the OP's token endpoint using the new grant type. 

### Authentication Request

This CAMARA document makes the login_hint parameter REQUIRED if CIBA is used in a CAMARA context.

This CAMARA document clarifies the values used in login_hint in the following way:

    * **_tel_**

      For phone numbers. The `login_hint` must be a tel URI as defined in [RFC 3966](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3966) for global phone numbers without visual separators in [E.164](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-E.164-201011-I/en) format. For example, `tel:+34666666666`.

    * **_ipport_**

      For IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, that can optionally include a port. For example, `ipport:80.90.34.2:16790`, `ipport:80.90.34.2`, `ipport:[2001:db8::1]:8080` or `ipport:[2001:db8::1]`.

The client MUST authenticate with the authorization server as described in [Client Authentication Section](#client-authentication).

> ## Refresh Token Usage
> 
> This section applies to OIDC Authorization Code Flow and CIBA. Other flows do not need refresh tokens and MUST not use refresh tokens.

Reviewer 5: For clarity, we think that it is better to remove the _Offline Access_ section from _OIDC Authorization Code flow_ section and move the _Refresh Token Issuance_ section describing the use of `offline_access` scope, without the notes and duplicate text from the standard that could cause misunderstanding as to its intended use in the context of Camara:

```suggestion
## Refresh Tokens

This section applies to OIDC Authorization Code Flow and CIBA. Other flows do not need refresh tokens and MUST not use refresh tokens.

### Refresh Token Issuance

Neither OIDC not OAuth2 define a way for clients to indicate whether they need a refresh_token.  In OIDC and OAuth2 refresh token issuance is optional in Authorization Code Flow and CIBA, and at the discretion of the AZ.

Camara uses the scope `offline_access` in the authorization request to indicate to the AZ that the client requests a refresh token additionally to the access token for Camara API access.

### Refresh Token Usage
```

This document defines that the authentication server SHOULD not return an id token if `openid` is missing in the scope parameter.

This document defines the following error handling for a missing "openid" value in scope. 
Please refer to [Authentication Error Response](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthError).

If "openid" is missing in the scope value but a claim that is [standardized in OIDC](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#Claims) is requested, then the Authorization Server returns an HTTP response code of 400 (Bad Request) and an error invalid_request.

Clients SHOULD follow the OIDC standard and SHOULD include `openid` in the list of requested scopes.
Without id token there is no `sub` field and the privacy features of OIDC are severely crippled. 
Globally unique identifiers, like the MSISDN, should be avoided for privacy reasons.

## Purpose

In Camara Purpose is encoded into the scope values.
If a purpose is declared in a scope then the scope MUST have this format: `dpv:<dpvValue>#<technicalParameter>`

`<dpvValue>` is coming from [W3C DPV purpose definition](https://w3c.github.io/dpv/dpv/#vocab-purpose)

> 

Author: In general I am not in favor of stating the obvious...
But please see that section now https://github.com/AxelNennker/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/camara_oidc_profile/documentation/CAMARA-Security-Interoperability.md#purpose

(please use "suggestions". Makes my life easier, although I did not follow your suggestion this time)

> 

Reviewer 6: Thank you for the note. I think that this is a very good addition.

Please see [OAuth 2.0 Security Best Current Practice](https://oauthstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics/draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics.html#name-protecting-redirect-based-f).

## Client-Initiated Backchannel Authentication Flow

The [Client-Initiated Backchannel Authentication (CIBA)](https://openid.net/specs/openid-client-initiated-backchannel-authentication-core-1_0.html) flow is used to initiate an out-of-band authentication of the end-user.

Communication with the Backchannel Authentication Endpoint MUST utilize TLS.

CIBA allows the Client to get the authentication result in three ways: poll, ping, or push. This profile allows clients to use the *poll* mode. In the Poll mode, the authentication result is retrieved by the Client by polling the OP's token endpoint using the new grant type. 

### Optional Parameters

The parameters `binding_message`, `user_code`, and `requested_expiry` are currently not implemented in Camara and for interoperability this document defines that the authorization server SHOULD ignore them. 

### Authentication Request

> This CAMARA document makes the login_hint parameter REQUIRED if CIBA is used in a CAMARA context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CIBA allows the client to optionally use login_hint_token, id_token_hint or login_hint as a hint in the authentication request. This CAMARA profile makes the login_hint parameter REQUIRED. The client SHALL specify login_hint (and only login_hint) in the authentication request when using CIBA in a CAMARA context.
```

   * [Offline Access](#offline-access)
         - [Refresh Token Issuance](#refresh-token-issuance)
      + [Refresh Token Usage](#refresh-token-usage)
         - [Refresh Token Usage Error Response](#refresh-token-usage-error-response)
      + [Refresh Token Security](#refresh-token-security)
   * [Client Credentials Flow](#client-credentials-flow)
   * [Handling of acr_values](#handling-of-acr_values)
   * [Access Token Request](#access-token-request)
   * [The Scope Parameter](#the-scope-parameter)
   * [Missing "openid" scope](#missing-openid-scope)
   * [Purpose](#purpose)
   * [ID Token](#id-token)
      + [ID Token sub claim](#id-token-sub-claim)
   * [Client Authentication](#client-authentication)
   * [OpenId Foundation Certification](#openid-foundation-certification)
   * [References](#references)

<!-- TOC end -->

## Introduction

This document is the CAMARA Security and Interoperability Profile. To ensure interoperability and increased security, this technical specification restricts some options available in OIDC and CIBA, but does not change these standards.

The CAMARA document sharpens the following for interoperability and security: 

> * Of the flows defined in OIDC CAMARA uses the [OIDC Authorization Code Flow](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#CodeFlowAuth)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Of the flows defined in OIDC, CAMARA uses the [OIDC Authorization Code Flow](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#CodeFlowAuth) and [OIDC Client Initiated Backchannel Authentication Flow](https://openid.net/specs/openid-client-initiated-backchannel-authentication-core-1_0.html)
```

> 

Reviewer 7: * Of the flows defined in Oauth2, Camara uses the [Client credentials grant flow](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6749#section-4.4)

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Of the flows defined in Oauth2, Camara uses the [Client credentials grant flow](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6749#section-4.4)
```

* Scope Parameter. Recommendations about the format of the scope parameter used in  CAMARA APIs.

* Client Authentication. Specifications for client authentication within CAMARA.

By encapsulating these elements within this document, it aims to provide a comprehensive guide for developers and operators, ensuring consistent implementation and adherence to standardized security measures across the CAMARA ecosystem. The defined OIDC profile not only facilitates the integration process, but also serves as a basic framework for developers wishing to leverage the CAMARA APIs while maintaining security and interoperability.

## Audience

> The target audience for this document is the service/technical departments of operators exposing network functions via standard CAMARA APIs. And applications or client systems that consume CAMARA standard APIs to make use of the operator's network capabilities.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The target audience for this document is the service/technical departments of operators exposing network functions via standard CAMARA APIs and the applications or client systems that consume CAMARA standard APIs to make use of the operator's network capabilities.
```

OIDC defines the scope `offline_access` and it is used to get an access token to be used at the UserInfo endpoint, and also to obtain a request token to refresh this access token.

---

The OIDC rules for `offline_access` as defined in [OIDC Offline Access](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#OfflineAccess) apply. 

The OIDC section on [OIDC Using Refresh Tokens](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshTokens) is not changed by this document.

The OIDC security and privacy considerations regarding offline access and refresh tokens apply e.g. on
[Token lifetime](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#TokenLifetime) and [Offline Access Privacy](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#OfflineAccessPrivacy).

### Refresh Token Usage

This section applies to OIDC Authorization Code Flow and CIBA. Other flows do not need refresh tokens and MUST not use refresh tokens.

In addition to [OIDC Using Refresh Tokens](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshTokens) and [OAuth2 Refreshing an Access Token](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-6) this document defines the following:

>     The authorization decisions for issuing an access token MUST be re-checked by the Authorization Server when a refresh token is used. 

Reviewer 10: The requirement for re-checking authorization decisions by the Authorization Server upon the consumption of a refresh token is neither part nor mentioned in the specifications of OAuth 2.0, OIDC, and CIBA.

Introducing a mandate for re-checking authorization decisions when refresh tokens are used would significantly impact existing OAuth Refresh Token Flow implementations. This change would require authorization servers to incorporate additional logic to assess the current validity of the user's permissions at the time of the refresh token's use.

>     The authorization decisions for issuing an access token MUST be re-checked by the Authorization Server when a refresh token is used. 

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion

```

Author: Please review https://github.com/AxelNennker/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/camara_oidc_profile/documentation/CAMARA-Security-Interoperability.md again. I removed `re-check` because that is an implementation detail. The important part is that the refresh-token-request fails in the case described

Reviewer 10: I added my suggestion below based on the below:

> A refresh token is a string representing the authorization granted to the client by the resource owner. 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.5.

>     The authorization decisions for issuing an access token MUST be re-checked by the Authorization Server when a refresh token is used. 

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
   Refresh tokens MUST be invalidated when the Resource Owner revokes their consent related to this grant.
```

>         * A new access token MUST not be issued if the user has revoked their consent.

Reviewer 10: * A refresh token MUST be revoked if the user has revoked their consent.
* A refresh token MUST be revoked if the client status regarding the requested API access has changed.

>         * A new access token MUST not be issued if the user has revoked their consent.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
        * A refresh token MUST be revoked if the user has revoked their consent.
```

>         * A new access token MUST not be issued if the client status regarding the requested API access has changed.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
        * A refresh token MUST be revoked if the client status regarding the requested API access has changed.
```

Author: The sentence before the list is `The authorization decisions for issuing an access token MUST be re-checked by the Authorization Server when a refresh token is used. `. So, I would argue that the list is about `access tokens`.

I think it is an implementation detail whether the refresh token is revoked in the moment the user revokes their consent or whether the AZ return invalid_grant instead of issuing a new access token.

#### Refresh Token Usage Error Response

> This document requires that the error `invalid_grant` MUST be used in the [error response](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.2) if user consent is required. New user consent might be required if e.g. the user revoked their consent and the issued access tokens and refresh token are not valid anymore.

Reviewer 10: This document requires that the error `invalid_grant` MUST be used in the [error response](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.2) if the refresh token is not valid anymore.

Author: @izahirclemencia could you please use "[suggestions](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request)" if you have proposals of text changes? That would help a lot, thank you.

> This document requires that the error `invalid_grant` MUST be used in the [error response](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.2) if user consent is required. New user consent might be required if e.g. the user revoked their consent and the issued access tokens and refresh token are not valid anymore.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
This document requires that the error `invalid_grant` MUST be used in the [error response](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.2) if the refresh token is not valid anymore. 
```

Author: @izahirclemencia please review that section again

> REQUIRED. OpenID Connect requests MUST contain the openid scope value. If the openid scope value is not present, the behavior is entirely unspecified. Other scope values MAY be present. ...

This document defines that the authentication server SHOULD not return an id token if `openid` is missing in the scope parameter.

This document defines the following error handling for a missing "openid" value in scope. 
Please refer to [Authentication Error Response](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthError).

If "openid" is missing in the scope value but a claim that is [standardized in OIDC](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#Claims) is requested, then the Authorization Server returns an HTTP response code of 400 (Bad Request) and an error invalid_request.

Clients SHOULD follow the OIDC standard and SHOULD include `openid` in the list of requested scopes.
Without id token there is no `sub` field and the privacy features of OIDC are severely crippled. 
Globally unique identifiers, like the MSISDN, should be avoided for privacy reasons.

## Purpose

> A transaction specific request parameter purpose as specified in [openid-connect-4-identity-assurance-1_0-13](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-4-identity-assurance-1_0.html#name-transaction-specific-purpos) MUST be used to allow a SP to state the purpose for the transfer of End-User data it is asking for.

Reviewer 4: I made a comment [here](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/issues/140#issuecomment-2061425844) about this proposed text. My interpretation of the Identity Assurance specification is that the `purpose` request parameter is to be added as an extension of the [`claims`](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#Claims) request parameter (see [example](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-4-identity-assurance-1_0.html#section-6.1-11)).

But I don't think that is what is intended here. If it is what is intended, it needs to be far better explained.

Author: I like the simplicity of this "purpose" proposal. The reference to identity assurance is mostly something that says "others doing it the same way". 

I think the hardest part in standardization is finding a small meaningful step that people can agree on. It could all be standardized more fully with higher complexity, but then people never agree.
As TEF said, let's go with this for this release, and continue working on purpose the next release.

Reviewer 9: @eric-murray it is important to note that the complete document introduces two different things which are both named `purpose`:

1. in chapter 11 (which is explicitly linked here in the text above) the transaction specific "**request parameter** `purpose` to allow an RP to state the purpose for the transfer of End-User data it is asking for"  
2. in chapter 6.1 an (optional) "additional **field** purpose to allow an RP to state the purpose for the transfer of a certain End-User Claim it is asking for" ... that is where you picked the examples from, but that is not meant here.

I suppose we are on the same stage with no 1., right? There is already the [request for examples](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/issues/143) which would help here, but I understood that they will potentially go into another document.

Reviewer 4: @hdamker 
> I suppose we are on the same stage with no 1., right?

So first, let me say that I do understand what is meant, I just think linking to the eKYC-IDA document introduces unnecessary ambiguity, and the possibility that someone who has not attended the ,meetings or read the comments would misinterpret what is meant.

> it is important to note that the complete eKYC-IDA document introduces two different things which are both named `purpose`:

I don't think the eKYC-IDA document explains this first use of `purpose` at all well. The term "request parameter" is doing a lot of heavy lifting there, which is not wise for a term that is not defined. Indeed, in [Section 6.1](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-4-identity-assurance-1_0.html#section-6.1-10), the specification refers to `purpose` as both a "field" and "parameter", so I'm not convinced that the authors are using separate definitions.

A reasonable interpretation of the term "request parameter" would be a "parameter included within the request", and not only "a query or form parameter". Or if I took my definition of "request parameter" from OAS, then that would exclude "parameters" in the request body. So I do not think we can rely on the use of the term "parameter" to ensure that __only__ the first meaning is assumed.

Linking to a document that defines two uses for a "variable" named `purpose` is surely a recipe for ambiguity. If all we are taking from the eKYC-IDA document is the name `purpose` and its format, then why not just state those explicitly in the OIDC profile and avoid this ambiguity?

Reviewer 4: @AxelNennker 
> I like the simplicity of this "purpose" proposal. The reference to identity assurance is mostly something that says "others doing it the same way".

I couldn't find an existing implementation of OIDC that supports `purpose` as an additional query parameter for `/authorize` or additional form parameter for `/bc-authorize`, but there are some that support `purpose` as an additional field of `claims`.

Do you have an example of an authorisation server which has implemented the identity assurance specification in the way intended here?

Author: We agree on that Camara need some way to specify "purpose", right?
At the same time we/I want to keep vendor lock-in to a minimum.
Both approaches, purpose-parameter and purpose-coded-in-scope, require some special handling at the AZ.
I very much like to keep to standards, so at first I supported the purpose-coded-in-scope way but that approach also needs some special handling of the scopes at the AZ. I think, that purpose-coded-in-scope works in simple cases for of-the-shelf-OIDC-AZ but not for Camara/GSMA use cases. 

Now my understanding of the matter is that some custom code is needed at the AZ anyway and I think the purpose-parameter approach is simple, clear and moves us in the right direction. And also alread specified in eKYC-IDA.

> This specification introduces the request parameter purpose to allow an RP to state the purpose for the transfer of End-User data it is asking for.

> purpose: OPTIONAL. String describing the purpose for obtaining certain End-User data from the OP. The purpose MUST NOT be shorter than 3 characters and MUST NOT be longer than 300 characters. If these rules are violated, the authentication request MUST fail and the OP returns an error invalid_request to the RP.

By defining that the dpv-values must be used we are even clearer than eKYC-IDA.

Reviewer 4: @AxelNennker
> We agree on that Camara need some way to specify "purpose", right?

Yes, and this is being discussed in #140. My understanding is that the current text for this PR is attempting to describe Option 1 of that issue. I'm happy with Option 1; my concern is that the current text proposal with the link to the eKYC-IDA document does not describe that option very well, primarily because it is not very well described in the eKYC-IDA document itself.

This is particularly true for CIBA, which does not have "request parameters", and can have either signed or unsigned flavours with different body formats. Whilst I can surmise what is required simply by replacing the current `scope` parameter in my requests with a `scope` and `purpose` pair of parameters at the same "level", that might not be obvious to any developers coming to this "fresh".

Some examples would help, of course, but a specification should not have to rely on examples for disambiguation.

Author: Please explain, what is not "well described". We all agree that Camara needs something-something-purpose. The initial proposal to encode purpose into scopes had limitations and also there is a disconnect between API subgroups who define "technical scopes" and purpose-encoded-scopes. So, we tried to replace the 0.1 version with the simple purpose parameter and dpv-values. I do not see, what is missing in the description. I think specifying a new parameter purpose and its dpv-values is so simple that is even does not require examples.
We are going to add examples later https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/issues/143. Maybe we add an implementers-guidelines document...

I see no way to misread the purpose proposal.

Here is the OIDC example from https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthRequest + purpose:

> The following is a non-normative example HTTP 302 redirect response by the Client, which triggers the User Agent to make an Authentication Request to the Authorization Endpoint (with line wraps within values for display purposes only):

```javascript
HTTP/1.1 302 Found
  Location: https://server.example.com/authorize?
    response_type=code
    &scope=openid%20profile%20email
    &client_id=s6BhdRkqt3
    &state=af0ifjsldkj
    &redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fclient.example.org%2Fcb
    &purpose=dpv:dpvValue
```

 If the AZ supports request objects then the field `purpose` is added to the request object. Similar CIBA.
```
{
   ...
   "purpose" : "dpv:dpvValue"
   ...
}

```

Is there a way to interpret the `purpose`request parameter differently? I don't see it.

---

The OIDC rules for `offline_access` as defined in [OIDC Offline Access](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#OfflineAccess) apply. 

The OIDC section on [OIDC Using Refresh Tokens](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshTokens) is not changed by this document.

The OIDC security and privacy considerations regarding offline access and refresh tokens apply e.g. on
[Token lifetime](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#TokenLifetime) and [Offline Access Privacy](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#OfflineAccessPrivacy).

### Refresh Token Usage

This section applies to OIDC Authorization Code Flow and CIBA. Other flows do not need refresh tokens and MUST not use refresh tokens.

In addition to [OIDC Using Refresh Tokens](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshTokens) and [OAuth2 Refreshing an Access Token](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-6) this document defines the following:

     * A new access token MUST not be issued if the user has revoked their consent.

>      * A new access token MUST not be issued if the client status regarding the requested API access has changed.

Reviewer 10: >      * A new access token MUST not be issued if the client status regarding the requested API access has changed.

In which scenario can this occur?

Author: The client's contract was changed or terminated.

Reviewer 10: The customer/subscriber or the application?

Author: The term `client` in all documents is defined by OAuth2 / OIDC and is the API consumer.

---
**NOTE**

> New user consent might be required if e.g. the user revoked their consent and the issued access tokens and refresh token are not valid anymore.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion

```
Is not relevant for refresh token usage.

Author: The user at one point in time gave their consent, but then a week later revokes that consent. Maybe only for part of the originally requested scopes.
Now the client uses the original request token. The AZ "sees" that the consent was revoked and now revokes the refresh token (and all access tokens) and returns invalid_grant. Which the client should interpret as "If I really need that access token, then I should ask for consent again because otherwise I cannot fulfill my contract or I cannot provide that service for my customer"

Reviewer 10: > Now the client uses the original request token. The AZ "sees" that the consent was revoked and now revokes the refresh token (and all access tokens) and returns invalid_grant. 

How can the AZ "see" if the consent was revoked, during the Refresh Token Grant? 

If the client (application) revokes the refresh token when the user revokes their consent, the AZ will be returning an invalid_grant error as outlined in RFC 6749, Section 6 (https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-6).

This process ensures that the client cannot act on behalf of the user without their consent. If the client then attempts to generate a new access token using the Authorization Code Flow, the AZ will not automatically grant access. Instead, it will require the client to redirect the user to the consent screen, mirroring the original authorization flow.

Author: I think there is no dispute over that the AZ has to check the validity of the refresh token. That validity check in a large telco/aggregator system probably goes to a different host and through some API checkValidityOfRequest(aRequest). Whether the different host is "just" a database of all valid refresh tokens or to a consent-management system, that checks, whether consent for that refresh token was revoked , does probably not make a huge difference. Maybe it does make a difference but that are implementation details.

The security and interoperablity document tries to specify that if the user revoked their consent then the request should return an error instead of an access token.
If the user revoked their consent  week ago, then the refresh token might be invalidated a week ago OR it might be invalidated when the refresh token is used. Either way, the AZ must return invalid_grant.

Reviewer 10: OK, please look at my latest suggestion, which aligns with your comment.

> REQUIRED. OpenID Connect requests MUST contain the openid scope value. If the openid scope value is not present, the behavior is entirely unspecified. Other scope values MAY be present. ...

This document defines that the authentication server SHOULD not return an id token if `openid` is missing in the scope parameter.

This document defines the following error handling for a missing "openid" value in scope. 
Please refer to [Authentication Error Response](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthError).

If "openid" is missing in the scope value but a claim that is [standardized in OIDC](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#Claims) is requested, then the Authorization Server returns an HTTP response code of 400 (Bad Request) and an error invalid_request.

Clients SHOULD follow the OIDC standard and SHOULD include `openid` in the list of requested scopes.
Without id token there is no `sub` field and the privacy features of OIDC are severely crippled. 
Globally unique identifiers, like the MSISDN, should be avoided for privacy reasons.

## Purpose

> A transaction specific request parameter purpose as specified in [openid-connect-4-identity-assurance-1_0-13](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-4-identity-assurance-1_0.html#name-transaction-specific-purpos) MUST be used to allow a SP to state the purpose for the transfer of End-User data it is asking for.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the client is requesting access to end user data, the reason for this MUST be specified in a separate `purpose` parameter. This parameter MUST be included in the authentication request at the same level as the `scope` parameter. and applies to all requested scopes. This method of declaring the purpose of a transaction is currently being specified by the [OpenID eKYC-IDA Working Group](https://openid.net/wg/ekyc-ida/).
```

Therefore scopes should be available to API implementations.

---

## Missing "openid" scope

[OIDC Core Authentication Request](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthRequest) states the following about the value of scope.
> REQUIRED. OpenID Connect requests MUST contain the openid scope value. If the openid scope value is not present, the behavior is entirely unspecified. Other scope values MAY be present. ...

This document defines that the authentication server SHOULD not return an id token if `openid` is missing in the scope parameter.

This document defines the following error handling for a missing "openid" value in scope. 
Please refer to [Authentication Error Response](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthError).

If "openid" is missing in the scope value but a claim that is [standardized in OIDC](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#Claims) is requested, then the Authorization Server returns an HTTP response code of 400 (Bad Request) and an error invalid_request.

Clients SHOULD follow the OIDC standard and SHOULD include `openid` in the list of requested scopes.

> Without id token there is no `sub` field and the privacy features of OIDC are severely crippled. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Without id token there is no mandatory `sub` field and the privacy features of OIDC are severely crippled. 
```
Please note that the sub field is also there in the access token, but not optional.
From RFC 7519: The "sub" (subject) claim identifies the principal that is the
   subject of the JWT.  The claims in a JWT are normally statements
   about the subject.  The subject value MUST either be scoped to be
   locally unique in the context of the issuer or be globally unique.
   The processing of this claim is generally application specific.  The
   "sub" value is a case-sensitive string containing a StringOrURI
   value.  Use of this claim is OPTIONAL.

Globally unique identifiers, like the MSISDN, should be avoided for privacy reasons.

## Purpose

In Camara `purpose` is used to convey to the user for which purpose an API is used. E.g.: Does the client request the user's location because it wants to show relevant tourist information or is the user's location information protecting the user when they withdraw money from an ATM? 

Purpose has always to be reflected and audited when personal information is accessed or managed in certain legislations (e.g. in EU GDPR). To ensure interoperability across different legislations this profile requires that the purpose must always be declared within the supported OIDC or OAuth2 token requests if personal information is accessed or managed.

### Purpose as a scope

Purpose is one of the scope parameter's values. There MUST be exactly one purpose.

The Authorization Server identifies the purpose using the prefix `dpv:`.

This scope MUST have the following format: `dpv:<dpvValue>` where `<dpvValue>` is coming from [W3C DPV purpose definition](https://w3c.github.io/dpv/dpv/#vocab-purpose)

### Outlook on purpose-handling leveraging Rich Authorization Request

> [RFC 9396 OAuth 2.0 Rich Authorization Requests](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9396) defines a OAuth2 parameter `authorization_details` that is used to carry fine-grained authorization data. The parameter `authorization_details` can be used in all places where OAuth2 allows the `scope` parameter. That means that the parameter `authorization_details` can be used in all places where OIDC and CIBA allow the `scope` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[RFC 9396 OAuth 2.0 Rich Authorization Requests](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9396) defines a OAuth2 parameter `authorization_details` that is used to carry fine-grained authorization data. The parameter `authorization_details` can be used in all places where OAuth2 allows the `scope` parameter. That means that the parameter `authorization_details` can be used in all places where OIDC or OAuth2 allow the `scope` parameter.
```

Author: RAR says that authorization_details can be used in all places scope can be used. RAR does not mention CIBA.
But, yes, we can mention CIBA here.

Reviewer 9: @AxelNennker the suggestion is to replace "OIDC and CIBA" by "OIDC or OAuth2", so NOT to mention CIBA. The suggestion makes sense for me, but propose to do it a later editorial PR. No need to dismiss the already done approvals for that.

---

The OIDC rules for `offline_access` as defined in [OIDC Offline Access](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#OfflineAccess) apply. 

The OIDC section on [OIDC Using Refresh Tokens](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshTokens) is not changed by this document.

The OIDC security and privacy considerations regarding offline access and refresh tokens apply e.g. on
[Token lifetime](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#TokenLifetime) and [Offline Access Privacy](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#OfflineAccessPrivacy).

### Refresh Token Usage

This section applies to OIDC Authorization Code Flow and CIBA. Other flows do not need refresh tokens and MUST not use refresh tokens.

In addition to [OIDC Using Refresh Tokens](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#RefreshTokens) and [OAuth2 Refreshing an Access Token](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-6) this document defines the following:

     * A new access token MUST not be issued if the user has revoked their consent.

>      * A new access token MUST not be issued if the client status regarding the requested API access has changed.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
```

Author: Both statements are not very technical and both prepare the implementer for cases where new access tokens must not be issued. I suggest to leave text unchanged.

Reviewer 10: Can you give me an example scenario where "A new access token MUST not be issued if the client status regarding the requested API access has changed." occurs? Your previous answer did not clarify..

Author: The client was hacked. 
Tokens were leaked or were stolen and sender-contraint access tokens are not implemented.
The client terminated or changed their contract.
The client lied.

All not very technical and we do not have all the management APIs in place to automate this.
But the same is true, for consent management APIs.

Can we leave this text unchanged for now and merge, or do you see the _need_ for changes?

Reviewer 10: > The term `client` in all documents is defined by OAuth2 / OIDC and is the API consumer.

Based on the OAuth2 specifications, the term 'client' refers to an application that makes protected resource requests on behalf of the resource owner and with its authorization. 

The last two example scenarios are not related to the client but rather to the end-user (resource owner).

So my recommendation remains the same.

Author: > > The term `client` in all documents is defined by OAuth2 / OIDC and is the API consumer.
> 
> Based on the OAuth2 specifications, the term 'client' refers to an application that makes protected resource requests on behalf of the resource owner and with its authorization.

I should not have written "API consumer" because that is just a SW component. https://github.com/camaraproject/Commonalities/blob/main/documentation/Glossary.md
 
`client` in my book is that entity that is onboarded and with which "we" have a contract which allows API access, quotas, scopes and whatnot.

> 
> The last two example scenarios are not related to the client but rather to the end-user (resource owner).
> 

That "client" changed their contract e.g. removing API1 from their contract.
That "client" lied during onboarding and the contract they have is void.

Why do you think that is the end-user (resource owner).

> So my recommendation remains the same.

Reviewer 10: If we want to comply with the OAuth2 specifications conforming to RFC https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749, we should keep in mind that a client can act on behalf of an entity (either a company or an individual), but it is not the entity itself.

Revised scenarios aligned with the standard are as follows:

- A person (the resource owner) changes their contract, e.g., removes API1 (the resource) from their contract (granted authorization).
- A person lied during onboarding, and the contract (granted authorization) is declared void by the company (the other resource owner).

Author: A resource owner/end-user does not have a contract with "us". So, the AZ cannot know whether the contract between the end-user and the client (entity behind the client) has changed.

I would like to resolve this conversation if nobody chimes in.

Please refer to [Authentication Error Response](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#AuthError).

If "openid" is missing in the scope value but a claim that is [standardized in OIDC](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#Claims) is requested, then the Authorization Server returns an HTTP response code of 400 (Bad Request) and an error invalid_request.

Clients SHOULD follow the OIDC standard and SHOULD include `openid` in the list of requested scopes.
Without id token there is no `sub` field and the privacy features of OIDC are severely crippled. 
Globally unique identifiers, like the MSISDN, should be avoided for privacy reasons.

## Purpose

In Camara `purpose` is used to convey to the user for which purpose an API is used. E.g.: Does the client request the user's location because it wants to show relevant tourist information or is the user's location informat protecting the user when they withdraw money from an ATM?
Therefore `purpose`is only used in Camara when user consent is required (CIBA or OIDC authorization code flow) and a potential `prompt` parameter's value is NOT `none`.

> 

Reviewer 6: please replace line #215 by the text below:

Therefore `purpose` is only used in Camara when privacy sensitive data is subject to the API invocation and  explicit check for user consent must happen. This consent check is applicable only for CIBA or OIDC authorization code flow, where the subject of the API call is known at access token request. 

Reason is that we need to send the purpose on all CIBA and auth code flows, where we handle potentially privacy sensitive data. this does not mean that the handling is always subject to user consent. Please replace line 215 with suggestion above.
Also, please remove the statement about the prompt parameter (because it is wrong for legal base = legitimate interest). There might be a consent flow needed or not. This is a topic on its own and needs time to discuss.

Reviewer 6: Sorry for the late finding, but we need the purpose sent on all of the auth code flow and CIBA requests for Camara APIs.

Reviewer 3: From TEF point of view, we can't accept that sentence as it stands either. This topic is discussed further in #131 and TEF's position on when "purpose" must be declared is given [here](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/issues/131#issuecomment-1968441327).

>The CAMARA community agreement on 2-legged vs. 3-legged access can be summarised (as documented) as "Every time personal user data is processed by an API and the user can exercise his rights either via opt-in and/or opt-out, 3-legged access tokens must be used."
>
>However, this is an independent debate on whether the purpose for which personal data is consumed should be declared when using client credentials (2-legged access).
>
>From Telefónica's point of view, when personal data is processed, the purpose must always be declared
(this is what the GDPR requires), regardless of the legal basis and whether it requires opt-in or the user can opt-out according to the local regulation that applies. And consequently, regardless of whether the use of "client credentials" is allowed.

That sentence, was recently included in https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/121/commits/be812b8a9dbafd96733fbdbbdc85a75055d4fd47. It was later added to most of the WG participants' reviews. Perhaps you can leave it out for now.

Reviewer 6: @jpengar: your statement is exactly in line with what I want to express. We need to phrase the sentence in a way that the purpose must be declared in the access token request (and a 3 legged access token must be used), every time personal data is processed by an API and a user can exercise his rights either via opt-in and/or opt-out (according to GDPR or other legislations).

Author: I tried to compile @Elisabeth-Ericsson "suggestion" and @jpengar comment into a new text.
At first I failed because I mixed up legal-basis and legislation. With @hdamker help we propose now this text.
https://github.com/AxelNennker/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/camara_oidc_profile/documentation/CAMARA-Security-Interoperability.md#purpose

> In Camara purpose is used to convey to the user for which purpose an API is used. E.g.: Does the client request the user's location because it wants to show relevant tourist information or is the user's location information protecting the user when they withdraw money from an ATM?

> Purpose has always to be reflected and audited when personal information is accessed or managed in certain legislations (e.g. in EU GDPR). To ensure interoperability across different legislations this profile requires that the purpose must always be declared within CIBA or OIDC Authorization Code flow token requests if personal information is accessed or managed.

Reviewer 11: Client credentials must also be considered, unless we restrict those scenarios that access / manage personal information to not use this grant type, even if no opt-out/opt-in is allowed (related discussion about this restriction, proposed to be lifted: https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/issues/131)

Reviewer 9: @diegogonmar I have intentionally proposed to not mentioned Client credentials here, for two reasons:

* Client Credential flow SHOULD NOT be used if personal information is accessed or managed ... therefore the formulation "the purpose must always be declared within CIBA or OIDC Authorization Code flow token requests if personal information is accessed or managed", mentioning Client Credentials here would give the wrong impression that this is a valid flow for requesting access to personal information.
* in the exceptional case that Client Credentials are used and personal information is accessed or managed, than this has been "agreed between the API Client and the Telco Operator exposing the API, taking into account the declared purpose for accessing the API" (cf. the Client Credential flow section here in the profile) - so the purpose is already declared upfront. Nevertheless API Client and the Telco Operator can also include in the agreement, that the purpose has to be send in the scope. BTW has the Client Credential flow no authorisation request, just the client authentication which is answered by an access token.

Beyond that I would be fine with adding "It SHOULD NOT be used if personal information is accessed or managed" to the Client Credential section.

Reviewer 11: Unless we forbid Client Credentials, and _should not_ is not forbidding it, we need to declare in the profile that when client credentials is used and manages personal information, purpose needs to be used and the solution we finally choose applies as well. 
The second bullet in your text can apply also to AuthCode or CIBA, i.e.: the API Client and Telco Operator may agree as well the purpose to be used by an API Client, and agree to use e.g.: CIBA. In any case, no matter the flow used, purpose is needed. If we agree for AuthCode/CIBA, it applies to Client Credentials.

Managing of personal information and therefore need to indicate the purpose is not related with one flow or another, it would apply the same even if we use non OAuth/OIDC flows.

Author: Personally I think that Authorization Code Flow is the most privacy friendly and should be used whenever possible.
Client Credentials flow is at the lower end of the spectrum (there are worse like resource owner flow).
CIBA is OK-ish and in the middle.

Maybe a little hard "If you think you must use client credentials then you are doing something wrong privacy-wise".

Anyway, that does not help us here. +1 to @hdamker comment.

(Please write "suggestions" rather than comments.)

Reviewer 11: This would be the suggestion:
_Purpose has always to be reflected and audited when personal information is accessed or managed in certain legislations (e.g. in EU GDPR). To ensure interoperability across different legislations this profile requires that the purpose must always be declared within the supported OIDC or OAuth2 token requests if personal information is accessed or managed._

Reviewer 11: @AxelNennker 
_Maybe a little hard "If you think you must use client credentials then you are doing something wrong privacy-wise"._

This is speculative. 
If client credentials only allow purposes which do not require opt-in or opt-out, then it is just as important to reflect that fact, than when is one purpose requiring it. Because you need to guarantee privacy just in the same manner, by auditing that access to personal information was done with a purpose which did not require the opt-in or opt-out

### Purpose as a scope

Purpose is one of the scope parameter's values. There MUST be exactly one purpose.

The Authorization Server identifies the purpose using the prefix `dpv:`.

This scope MUST have the following format: `dpv:<dpvValue>` where `<dpvValue>` is coming from [W3C DPV purpose definition](https://w3c.github.io/dpv/dpv/#vocab-purpose)

### Outlook on purpose-handling leveraging Rich Authorization Request

[RFC 9396 OAuth 2.0 Rich Authorization Requests](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9396) defines a OAuth2 parameter `authorization_details` that is used to carry fine-grained authorization data. The parameter `authorization_details` can be used in all places where OAuth2 allows the `scope` parameter. That means that the parameter `authorization_details` can be used in all places where OIDC and CIBA allow the `scope` parameter.

> This document defines exactly one format to be used in Camara for the value of the `authorization_details` parameter that is used additionally to the scope parameter.

Reviewer 3: @AxelNennker @Elisabeth-Ericsson IMHO, we better not document the RAR option in this profile release version. We may have a separate issue to reflect the agreement reached to consider the use of RAR for future releases when more complex scenarios/requirements may be needed (and include the proposed `authorization_details` format there). But documenting an unfinished solution now may be misleading. I would simplify the current profile version to just document the purpose management solution that applies now.

> This document defines exactly one format to be used in Camara for the value of the `authorization_details` parameter that is used additionally to the scope parameter.

Author: As Elisabeth said during the interim meeting yesterday the outlook tells implementers what this groups seems likely to come. I think that is helpful and not misleading. I got the impression yesterday that there was broad agreement that RAR is the way to go.

> This document defines exactly one format to be used in Camara for the value of the `authorization_details` parameter that is used additionally to the scope parameter.

Author: No worries.
Putting myself into the shoes of a developer to whom somebody says "Implement an AZ that adheres to Camara", I would read this security and interoperability document. But getting RAR implemented needs time and people probably should start thinking in that direction now. Because otherwise when we require RAR and people start working on RAR then, the whole process takes month/years.

> This document proposes a format to be used in Camara for the value of the `authorization_details` parameter that is used additionally to the scope parameter. Further format discussion will happen, before the current purpose handling will be replaced by using the RAR format.
> 
> ```
> [
>   {
>     "type": "org.camaraproject.<Camara-API-Name>",
>     "purpose": "dpv:<dpvValue>"
>   }
> ]
> ```
> 
> `<dpvValue>` is coming from [W3C DPV purpose definition](https://w3c.github.io/dpv/dpv/#vocab-purpose)
> 

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Further format discussion will happen, before the current purpose handling will be extending by using the RAR format.
```

OIDC also defines that the parameter acr_values is OPTIONAL and does not specify possible values. This leads to interoperability issues.

This documents defines that Camara OpenId Providers MUST ignore the parameter acr_values. 

This document defines that Camara Clients SHOULD not use the acr_values parameter. 

> To foster interoperability a future version of this document might define values for the acr_values parameter acceptable in Camara.

## Access Token Request

This CAMARA document makes the scope parameter REQUIRED for the OAuth2 Client Credentials Grant.

The client MUST authenticate with the authorization server as described in [Client Authentication Section](#client-authentication).

## The Scope Parameter

Scope values determine the specific CAMARA services being requested by the Service Provider, subject to the SP being registered to use those services. The scope values must be documented in the API OAS files by all Camara API subprojects.

### Purpose as part of scope

To improve interoperablitiy this document RECOMMENDS that API Working groups define scope values following this scheme:

`dpv:<dpvValue>#<technical_scope>`

> 

Reviewer 6: The dpvValue must never be part of the scope definition in the API spec. 
Some operators might allow for advertizing, others not.
Also it would lead to the fact that when requesting multiple scopes, different dpvValues values (purpose)  could be part of one access token request. This cannot be handled. 
When - during the authorization request , a consent check happens at that point in time. and the generated access token will contain the list of permitted scopes . Now assume that these scopes e.g. indicate:
advertizement#qod-session-read and serviceprovisioning#qod-session-write and serviceprovisioning#qod-session-read
When the service gets this access token as part of the api call, it needs to know in addition, what is the purpose of this, otherwise no chance to judge.
Conclusion: It is actually NOT recommended to include purpose values in the scopes of the 'API spec for various reasons.

Reviewer 2: I agree with your analysis.

In some of the initial proposals, the purpose was sent in a separate "purpose" query parameter in the /authorize call. The purpose was moved as an additional "scope" attribute to avoid deviating too much from the standard. It never has to be included in the OpenAPI specs because the same API can be consumed for many different purposes. And when you request a token, you need to send the purpose.

The commit a7156c0a270e152d696af2c17b3944d9178a54a5 will be problematic, because "each single scope value" means it can be more than one purpose. However, [the 0.1.0 docs](https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/blob/main/documentation/CAMARA-API-access-and-user-consent.md#applying-purpose-concept-in-the-authorization-request, but not multiple options) reflects the current agreement that it has to be either _one_ scope or _one_ api.

We need to review it to find a long-term solution that allows us to request multiple scopes for a given purpose, etc. But since it took us +9 months to reach the short-term agreement in #32, I'd strongly recommend to revert this commit and reflect what is currently stated in 0.1.0.

Author: I amended that section. Resolving this. Please review the amended section.

### Purpose as part of scope

To improve interoperablitiy this document RECOMMENDS that API Working groups define each single scope value following this scheme:

`dpv:<dpvValue>#<technical_scope>`

- `<dpvValue>` is coming from [W3C DPV purpose definition](https://w3c.github.io/dpv/dpv/#vocab-purpose)
- `<technical_scope>` some technical scope needed by the Camara API

Example value of scope parameter in a request:

> > "openid dpv:<dpvValue>#camara-api-scope0 dpv:<dpvValue>#camara-api-scope-1 dpv:<dpvValue>#camara-api-scope-2"

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/camaraproject/IdentityAndConsentManagement/pull/121/commits/a7156c0a270e152d696af2c17b3944d9178a54a5#r1492745957.

This will be a source of problems without further clarifications that need to be agreed upon. For example, all the `dpv:<dpvValues>` must be identical because that represents the reason why you are processing some personal information (e.g., you may access the sim swap API either for dpv:FraudPrevention#sim-swap or for dpv:Marketing#sim-swap but not both at the same time)

I'll revert this commit until that part is discussed.

cc @Elisabeth-Ericsson I think this is also what you said.
